h1. My Zipcode Gem

Simple gem to handle zipcode lookups and related functionality.

h2. Installation

Add the following line to your Gemfile:

  gem 'my_zipcode_gem'
  
Run:

  rake bundle install
  
Generate the models and populate the data:

  rails g my_zipcode_gem:models
  rake db:migrate
  rake zipcodes:update
  
You should now have three new tables and three new models, Zipcode, State, County.

h2. Usage

  zipcode = Zipcode.find_by_code '66206'
  zipcode.state.abbr    # => 'KS'
  zipcode.city          # => 'Shawnee Mission'
  zipcode.county.name   # => 'Johnson'
  zipcode.lat.to_s      # => '38.959356', it is actually a BigDecimal object converted to_s for documentation.
  zipcode.lon.to_s      # => '-94.716155', ditto
  zipcode.is_geocoded?  # => true, most if not all should be pre-geocoded.
  
You can also look for a zipcode from a city and state:

  Zipcode.find_by_city_state "Shawnee Mission", "KS"

You can use State and County objects as follows:

  state = State.find_by_abbr "MO"
  state.cities.count    # => 963
  state.cities          # gives you an sorted array of all cities for the state
  state.zipcodes.count  # => 1195
  
  county = state.counties.first
  county.cities.count   # => 5
  county.cities         # gives you an sorted array of all cities for the county
  county.zipcodes.count # => 5
  
h3. Automatic JQuery/AJAX lookup

You can have a user enter a zipcode and automatically lookup their city, state and county.

Put something like this in your view:

  f.text_field :zip, :size => 5, :maxlength => 5, :class => 'zipcode_interactive'
  f.text_field :city, :size => 20, :maxlength => 60, :readonly => true
  f.text_field(:state, :size => 2, :maxlength => 2, :readonly => true)
  f.text_field(:county, :size => 20, :maxlength => 60, :readonly => true)

Then add this to your application.js, but remember to replace [mycontrollername] with your own controller.

  $(document).ready(function() {
      // Interactive Zipcodes
      $('input.zipcode_interactive').blur(function(data) {
          var elem_id = $(this).attr("id");
          var base_id = elem_id.substring(0, elem_id.lastIndexOf("_"));
          $.get("/mycontrollername/get_zip_data/" + this.value, {},
          function(data) {
              var zipcode = $.parseJSON(data);
              var city = $('#' + base_id + '_city');
              var state = $('#' + base_id + '_state');
              var county = $('#' + base_id + '_county');
              if (zipcode.err) {
                  alert(zipcode.err);
              } else {
                  city.val(zipcode.city);
                  state.val(zipcode.state)
                  county.val(zipcode.county)
              }
          })
      });
  });

You will also need a controller method similar to this, which will return the data to your form:

  def get_zip_data
    @zipcode = Zipcode.find_by_code(params[:code], :include => [:county, :state])
    if @zipcode
      @counties = County.find(:all, :conditions => [ "state_id = ?", @zipcode.county.state_id ])
      data = {
        'state' => @zipcode.state.abbr,
        'county' => @zipcode.county.name,
        'city' => @zipcode.city.titleize
      }
      render :text => data.to_json
    else
      if params[:code].blank?
        return true
      else
        if params[:code].is_zipcode?
          data = {
            'err' => "Could not find Zipcode [#{params[:code]}].  If this is a valid zipcode please notify support <support@mydomain.com>, so we can update our database."
          }
        else
          data = {
            'err' => "[#{params[:code]}] is not a valid Zipcode."
          }
        end
        render :text => data.to_json
      end
    end
  end

And define a route for the AJAX function in routes.rb:

  get 'mycontrollername/get_zip_data/:code', :controller => 'mycontrollername', :action => 'get_zip_data'

That's about it.  

Let me know if there are any errors.  I cut and pasted the code above from a working application, but there may be some gotchas that I missed.

h2. LOG

h3. 05/03/2011:

Initial Release